# MCMap Format v1

@Metadata {
    @TitleHeading("Format Version")
    @PageColor(purple)
}

## Overview

The following article will outline the file format, key structures
involved, and best practices for working with the file format.

## General Structure

An `.mcmap` file is a package that consist of at least one file,
`Info.json` (see ``CartographyMapFile/Keys/metadata``). Below is an
example structure of how an `.mcmap` file looks on disk:

```
My World.mcmap/
    Info.json
    Images/
        f6654efd-e52c-4dae-b5e0-e91f08d8cb54.heic
        309643c9-d86b-4079-a9a6-4805d1b3c8e4.heic
        0c25dea0-ec2e-4061-87ca-da9391193889.heic
```

> Note: The `.mcmap` file is not a compressed archive. On Windows and
> other platforms that don't have Alidade installed, it will appear as a
> directory.


`.mcmap` files might also contain an `Images` directory (see
``CartographyMapFile/Keys/images``), containing various images, typically
stored in the HEIC file format.

<a name="File-metadata" />

## The Manifest

The `.mcmap` file contains a top-level file, `Info.json`, which provides
critical metadata about the file. This file is known as the _manifest_,
and it is heavily versioned.

The manifest will usually contain data such as the world's name, version,
seed, and player-created pins. Depending on the manifest version, they can
be stored in different locations or keys.

```json
{
    "manifestVersion": 1,
    "name": "My World",
    "mcVersion": "1.21",
    "seed": 123,
    "pins": [ ... ],
    "recentLocations": [ ... ]
}
```

The manifest also contains a `name` property, which represents the name of
the world, if it doesn't match the name of the file.

### Recent locations

The `recentLocations` key is used to store a list of recently visited
locations that the player can revisit or use to create a pin. It consists
of a two-dimensional array, with each subarray representing coordinates on
the X and Z axes:

```json
{
    "recentLocations": [ [0, 0], [1847, 1847] ]
}
```

### Pins

@Row(numberOfColumns: 6) {
    @Column(size: 4) {
        Pins are objects created by the player to mark specific points of
        interest in the world and associate specific metadata with them,
        such as images, colors, and descriptions. Pins are intended to be
        customizable and personal to the player's preferences and should
        offer flexibility.
        
        > Note: Pins are still a work in progress feature that will be
        > updated over time with more customization and personalization
        > options.
        
        A pin must contain the following keys:
        
        - `name`: (String) The player-assigned name for the pin.
        - `position`: (Array) The location of the pin in the world on the
           X and Z axes.
    }
    @Column(size: 2) {
        @Image(source: "FileFormat-Pins", alt: "A screenshot showing a player-made pin")
        An example pin for a player in their Minecraft world.
    }
}

Pins can also contain any of the following properties, which can be
customized by players:

- `aboutDescription`: (String) A player-authored description about the
  pin.
- `color`: (String) The pin's associated color.
- `images`: (Array) A list of images associated with this pin.

Some manifest versions might also provide their own properties on top of
these ones.

> Tip: To conserve disk space and memory, when players decide to delete
> pins, any associated images to that pin should also be removed. This is
> already handled with ``CartographyMapFile/removePins(at:)`` and
> ``CartographyMapFile/removePin(at:)`` in ``CartographyMapFile``.


## Images

Pins and other relevant data types might contain images that are
associated to them. Officially, the `.mcmap` file format doesn't
enforce a consistent naming convention for image files, but
Alidade will generate a unique UUID string to be used as the
file's name when a player uploads a photo from their Photos
library or an image file from their Mac through the Finder.

Images that correspond to a given data type, such as a pin, should
match the name of the file as it is stored in the 
``CartographyMapFile/Keys/images`` directory, without the folder
path. See below for how this is correlated for a pin as an
example.

@Row {
    @Column {
        **Info.json**
        ```json
        {
            ...,
            "pins" : [
                {
                    "name" : "My Pin",
                    "position" : [
                        0,
                        0
                    ],
                    "images" : [
                        "MyFile.heic"
                    ],
                    ...
                }
            ]
        }
        ```
    }
    @Column {
        **My World.mcmap**
        ```
        My World.mcmap/
            Info.json
            Images/
                MyFile.heic
                ...
        ```
    }
}

> Tip: Consider making image file names unique, and don't tie them
> with names of data types. Since players can rename these types
> at any given moment, having a unique name that isn't associated
> with a data type's name ensures stability across rename
> operations.

## Topics

### Manifest Versions and Types

- ``MCMapManifest_PreVersioning``
- ``MCMapManifest_v1``
- ``MCMapManifestPin``
