# MCMap Format v2

@Metadata {
    @TitleHeading("Format Version")
    @PageColor(purple)
}

## Overview

The following article will outline the file format, key structures
involved, and best practices for working with the file format.

> Note: To view the changes from v1 and how to handle migrations, refer to
> the [Changes since v1](#changes-since-v1) section of this document.

## General structure

An `.mcmap` file is a package that consist of multiple files and
directories containing metadata about the map, app state, integrations,
images, and more.

```
My World.mcmap/
    Info.json
    AppState/
        Tabs.json
    Images/
        f6654efd-e52c-4dae-b5e0-e91f08d8cb54.heic
        309643c9-d86b-4079-a9a6-4805d1b3c8e4.heic
        0c25dea0-ec2e-4061-87ca-da9391193889.heic
    Integrations/
        Bluemap.json
    Library/
        Pins/
            Home Sweet Home.json
```

> Note: The `.mcmap` file is not a compressed archive. On Windows and
> other platforms that don't have Alidade installed, it will appear as a
> directory.


<a name="File-metadata" />

## The manifest

The `.mcmap` file contains a top-level file, `Info.json`, which provides
critical metadata about the file. This file is known as the _manifest_,
and it is heavily versioned.

The manifest will usually contain data such as the world's name, version,
seed, and recently visited locations.

```json
{
    "manifestVersion": 2,
    "name": "My World",
    "pins": [],
    "recentLocations": [ ... ],
    "world": {
        "version": "1.21",
        "seed": 123,
        "largeBiomes": false
    }
}
```

The manifest also contains a `name` property, which represents the name of
the world, if it doesn't match the name of the file.

### Pins

The manifest might also contain player-created pins in the original
version of the format (see <doc:1.0#Pins>). Starting with v2 of the format,
these pins are automatically migrated to their new location in the library.

### Recent locations

The `recentLocations` key is used to store a list of recently visited
locations that the player can revisit or use to create a pin. It consists
of a two-dimensional array, with each subarray representing coordinates on
the X and Z axes:

```json
{
    "recentLocations": [ [0, 0], [1847, 1847] ]
}
```

## Library

The library directory (``CartographyMapFile/Keys/library``) is used to
store information about player-created content, such as pins. The
following describes what information exists in detail.

### Pins

@Row(numberOfColumns: 6) {
    @Column(size: 4) {
        Pins are objects created by the player to mark specific points of
        interest in the world and associate specific metadata with them,
        such as images, colors, and descriptions. Pins are intended to be
        customizable and personal to the player's preferences and should
        offer flexibility.
        
        A pin must contain the following keys:
        
        - `name`: (String) The player-assigned name for the pin.
        - `id`: (UUID) A unique identifier for this pin.
        - `position`: (Array) The location of the pin in the world on the
           X and Z axes.
        - `description`: (String) A small note describing the pin.
        - `dimension`: (String) The dimension where the pin is located.
    }
    @Column(size: 2) {
        @Image(source: "FileFormat-Pins", alt: "A screenshot showing a player-made pin")
        An example pin for a player in their Minecraft world.
    }
}

Pins can also contain any of the following properties, which can be
customized by players:

- `color`: (``CartographyMapPin/Color``) The pin's associated color.
- `images`: (Array) A list of images associated with this pin.
- `icon`: (``CartographyIcon``) A custom icon for the pin.
- `tags`: (Array) A set of tags associated with this pin.
- `alternateIDs`: (Array) A set of alternate IDs this pins is associated
  with.

> Tip: To conserve disk space and memory, when players decide to delete
> pins, any associated images to that pin should also be removed. This is
> already handled with ``CartographyMapFile/removePins(at:)`` and
> ``CartographyMapFile/removePin(at:)`` in ``CartographyMapFile``.

### Drawings

The format also allows players to draw on top of the map to create their
own unique overlays. Drawings are typically created using PencilKit, and
the data is stored in the `Drawings` subdirectory.

A drawing overlay contains at least the following:

- ``CartographyDrawing/id`` provides a unique identifier for the drawing
  overlay. When using ``CartographyMapFile``, this also acts as the file
  name.
- ``CartographyDrawing/data`` provides the overlay data, such as the map
  region that encompasses the drawing and the drawing data itself from
  PencilKit.

## Images

Pins and other relevant data types might contain images that are
associated to them. Officially, the `.mcmap` file format doesn't
enforce a consistent naming convention for image files, but
Alidade will generate a unique UUID string to be used as the
file's name when a player uploads a photo from their Photos
library or an image file from their Mac through the Finder.

Images that correspond to a given data type, such as a pin, should
match the name of the file as it is stored in the 
``CartographyMapFile/Keys/images`` directory, without the folder
path.

> Tip: Consider making image file names unique, and don't tie them
> with names of data types. Since players can rename these types
> at any given moment, having a unique name that isn't associated
> with a data type's name ensures stability across rename
> operations.

## Storing app state

Some apps such as Alidade might need to store information about their
state relative to the current file. The``CartographyMapFile/Keys/appState``
directory provides a place to store this information.

Currently, the app provides a single entry in the app state, used for
Alidade and other apps that use a SwiftUI `TabView` with tab customization
options. This property is stored in
``CartographyMapFile/Keys/appStateTabs``.

## Integrations

Starting with v2 of the format, the MCMap package format includes a
``CartographyMapFile/Keys/integrations`` directory that is used to store
configurations that integrate with other services from the Minecraft
community.

Each integration is required to have an `enabled` key, but any additional
properties might differ. For example, the following could be considered a
valid integration:

```json
{
    "enabled": true,
    "server": {
        "host": "https://maps.augenwaldburg.org",
        "port": 8100
    }
}
```

### Bluemap

v2 introduces a new integration for the
[Bluemap](https://bluemap.bluecolored.de) server plugin. This integration
allows players to fetch player locations, server-registered points of
interest, and death markers from a Minecraft server with the plugin
installed. This integration is stored as `Bluemap.json` in the
integrations directory.

An example configuration looks like the following:

```json
{
  "baseURL" : "bluemap.augenwaldburg.org",
  "display" : {
    "death" : true,
    "markers" : true,
    "players" : true
  },
  "enabled" : true,
  "mapping" : {
    "end" : "world_the_end",
    "nether" : "world_nether",
    "overworld" : "world"
  },
  "realtime" : false,
  "refreshRate" : 5
}
```

> See Also: For more information on the Bluemap integration object, refer
> to the ``MCMapBluemapIntegration`` type.

## Changes since v1

### App state

- The new `AppState` directory is used to store information about the
  app's current state.

### Core Manifest

- The `pins` property is deprecated and will be removed in v3 of the
  format.
- The `mcVersion` and `seed` properties have been replaced with a `world`
  property with sub-properties for `version` and `seed` (see "World
  Settings").

### Drawings

- The new `Drawings` subdirectory contains player-created drawings that
  appear on top of the map, and they reside in the new `Library`
  directory. Drawings contain information such as the ID and map region,
  and the drawing data uses PKDrawing from PencilKit.
  
### Integrations

- The new `Integrations` directory has been introduced to allow
  integrating with various Minecraft community services such as Bluemap.
  - The format provides a configuration for the Bluemap service, stored in
    this directory.

### Library

- The new `Library` directory has been introduced to store player-created
  content such as pins, collections, and drawing overlays.
    
### Pins

- Pins are now located in their own directory, under `Library/Pins`. Each
  pin is stored in its own file.
- Pins now require an `id` property which stores a unique identifier.
- The `aboutDescription` property has been renamed to `description`, and
  it is a required field.
- Pins are now versioned, with the latest version of the format being v2.
- The `tags`, `alternateIDs`, `dimension`, and `icon` properties have been
  added.

### World Settings

- The Minecraft version and seed are now moved into their own `world`
  object inside of the main manifest.
- Optionally, the world settings can define a `largeBiomes` property that
  signals whether the world was generated with the **Large Biomes** flag
  enabled.

## Topics

### Manifest Versions and Types

- ``MCMapManifest_v2``
- ``MCMapManifestWorldSettings``

### Features Supported

- ``CartographyMapPin``
- ``MCMapIntegration``
- ``CartographyDrawing``
